Document `x-test-features` and `format-feature-baseline` (#455)
microsoft/vcpkg-docs: vcpkg/commands/test-features.md

---
title: vcpkg x-test-features
description: Command line reference for the vcpkg test-features command. Builds all features of a package.
ms.date: 03/07/2025
---

# vcpkg test-features

> 

Reviewer: The experimental disclaimer is missing

## Synopsis

```console
vcpkg x-test-features [options] <package>...
```

## Description

Tests all features of a package by installing them in manifest mode. This command is useful for testing that all features of a package are working correctly.
The following tests are performed:
- The core feature gets installed with default featured disabled
- Every feature gets installed separately with default features disabled

> - All features combined gets installed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- All features combined get installed
```

> Feature which are unsupported or marked as cascade in --ci-feature-baseline are skipped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Features which are unsupported or marked as cascade in `--ci-feature-baseline` are skipped.
```

## Example

```console
$ $ ./vcpkg x-test-features curl
Computing 23 install plans...
Computing all ABI hashes...
Detecting compiler hash for triplet x64-linux...
Compiler found: /usr/bin/c++
Checking the binary cache...
Feature Test [1/23] curl[core]:x64-linux
Feature Test [2/23] curl[core,non-http]:x64-linux
Feature Test [3/23] curl[core,tool]:x64-linux
...
```

## Options

All vcpkg commands support a set of [common options](common-options.md).

### `--ci-feature-baseline`

Path to the `ci.feature.baseline.txt` file. Used to skip ports and detect regressions.

> Each line in this file is an assignment of a port spec to a state. `#`s indicate comments, and

Reviewer: I think in this context it's not clear what a port spec is.

Author: I think it was clear given subsequent examples but I added a few more just in case.

blank lines are ignored.

States:

* **fail** - The port build is expected to fail in the CI system.  
  This is not necessarily the same as if a port is expected to build on a developers machine
  because it may fail due to the machine configuration.
* **skip** - Do not build this port in the CI system.  
  This is added to ports that may be flaky or conflict with other ports. We recommend adding a
  comment for why a port is skipped so it can be removed when the issue is resolved.

> * **cascade** - The port depends on a port that fails or is excluded by a supports expression of a

Reviewer: I think this needs a link to the supports expression page.

Author: Do we have one?
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c6bd812d-d1a5-43c0-8002-cf3477f95cd9)

  dependency but the port itself states that it can be build. This is added to ports to detect

>   "hidden" not tested ports. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "hidden" untested ports. 
```

?

Author: Applied.

> Additional States can be specified for specific features:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional states can be specified for specific features:
```

> * **feature-fails** - The listed feature do not build. They are therefore excluded from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **feature-fails** - The listed features do not build. They are therefore excluded from the
```

  "combined" feature test because it would simply fail too.
* **combination-fails** - The listed combination of features will fail to build.
* **no-separate-feature-test** - The listed features are not tested in the "seperate" feature test.

> * **options** - The listed features are mutually exclusive and can not be selected together. The

Reviewer: I think it's important to highlight that usually this behavior is prohibited in the vcpkg repo by linking the maintainer guide.

  first feature in the list is added to every test combination. Use the `core` feature as first one

>   to add no feature to every test combination.

Reviewer: It's not clear to me what this means.

Reviewer 2: If we have for example a library A that can be build with `openssl` or `boringssl` the following would be tested by default: 
1. `a[core]` "core"
2. `a[core, openssl]` "test-features"
3. `a[core, boringssl]` "test-features"
4. `a[core, some-feature]` "test-features"
5. `a[core, openssl, boringssl, some-feature]` "test-features-combined"

Now it is often the case that you can not select `openssl` and `boringssl` at the same time. If the lib works when no ssl backend is selected you would choose `a[core, openssl, boringssl] = options` which would result in

1. `a[core]`
2. `a[core, openssl]`
3. `a[core, boringssl]`
4. `a[core, some-feature]`

But in case you must at least select one ssl backend you would write `a[openssl, boringssl] = options` which would result in 

1. `a[core, openssl]`
2. `a[core, boringssl]`
3. `a[core, openssl, some-feature]`

In the example block there is the following
```
## Examples:
##    qt3d[extras] = options # extras will be always added to the test combination (it is currently a requirement)
##    curl[core,openssl,wolfssl] = options # openssl and wolfssl are exclusive ssl backends but none must be selected
##    libgit2[pcre,pcre2] = options # you have to select pcre xor pcre2
```

> You could select ports by triplet or supports expression:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can select ports by triplet or supports expression:
```

?

---
title: vcpkg x-test-features
description: Command line reference for the vcpkg test-features command. Builds all features of a package.
ms.date: 03/07/2025
---

# vcpkg x-test-features

[!INCLUDE [experimental](../../includes/experimental.md)]

## Synopsis

```console
vcpkg x-test-features [options] <package>...
```

## Description

> Tests all features of a package by installing them in manifest mode. This command is useful for testing that all features of a package are working correctly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Installs all features of a package using manifest mode. This command is designed for testing that all features of a package work correctly.
```

The following tests are performed:

> - The core feature gets installed with default featured disabled

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The `core` feature gets installed with default featured disabled
```

- Every feature gets installed separately with default features disabled
- All features combined get installed

> Features which are unsupported or marked as cascade in `--ci-feature-baseline` are skipped.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Features marked as `unsupported` or `cascade` in [`--ci-feature-baseline`](#ci-feature-baseline) are skipped.
```

## Example

```console
$ $ ./vcpkg x-test-features curl
Computing 23 install plans...
Computing all ABI hashes...
Detecting compiler hash for triplet x64-linux...
Compiler found: /usr/bin/c++
Checking the binary cache...
Feature Test [1/23] curl[core]:x64-linux
Feature Test [2/23] curl[core,non-http]:x64-linux
Feature Test [3/23] curl[core,tool]:x64-linux
...
```

> ## Options

Author: Also needs `--for-merge-with`

All vcpkg commands support a set of [common options](common-options.md).

### `--ci-feature-baseline`

Path to the `ci.feature.baseline.txt` file. Used to skip ports and detect regressions.

> Each line in this file is an assignment of a port spec to a state. `#`s indicate comments, and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each line in this file is an assignment of a [port spec](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/vcpkg/commands/install#package-syntax) to a state. Lines starting with a `#` (treated as comments) and
```

blank lines are ignored. A port spec is of the form

> `port-name[features]:triplet(supports-expression)`, where the features, triplet, and supports

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`port-name[features]:triplet(supports-expression)`, where the features, triplet, and [`supports`](../reference/vcpkg-json.md#supports)
```

expression part are optiona. For example, `curl`, `curl[http2]`, `curl:x64-windows`, or
`curl[http2](!windows)`.

States:

* **fail** - The port build is expected to fail in the CI system.  
  This is not necessarily the same as if a port is expected to build on a developers machine
  because it may fail due to the machine configuration.
* **skip** - Do not build this port in the CI system.  
  This is added to ports that may be flaky or conflict with other ports. We recommend adding a
  comment for why a port is skipped so it can be removed when the issue is resolved.

> * **cascade** - The port depends on a port that fails or is excluded by a supports expression of a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **cascade** - The port depends on a port that fails or is excluded by a [supports expression](../reference/vcpkg-json.md#platform-expression) of a
```

> States:
> 
> * **fail** - The port build is expected to fail in the CI system.  
>   This is not necessarily the same as if a port is expected to build on a developers machine
>   because it may fail due to the machine configuration.
> * **skip** - Do not build this port in the CI system.  
>   This is added to ports that may be flaky or conflict with other ports. We recommend adding a
>   comment for why a port is skipped so it can be removed when the issue is resolved.
> * **cascade** - The port depends on a port that fails or is excluded by a supports expression of a
>   dependency but the port itself states that it can be build. This is added to ports to detect
>   "hidden" untested ports. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Baseline states 

Each port spec entry in the baseline file has one of the following associated states:

* **`fail`** - The build is expected to fail.
  The build may succeed on a development environment but fail in CI due to differences in machine configuration.
* **`skip`** - The build is not executed.
  Required for ports that produce inconsistent results (flaky) or conflict with other ports. A comment explaining the
  reason a port is skipped should be included so that its entry may be removed when the root issue is resolved.
* **`cascade`** - The build is not executed due to transitive exclusion.
  The port depends on a port that fails or is excluded by the `supports` expression of one of its dependencies.
  However, the port itself is not known to fail. This is added to detect "hidden" untested ports. 
```

I tried changing the tone a bit. I'm not sure if I understood the points you were trying to make completely so feel free to rewrite or expand if necessary.

Additional states can be specified for specific features:

> * **feature-fails** - The listed features do not build. They are therefore excluded from the
>   "combined" feature test because it would simply fail too.
> * **combination-fails** - The listed combination of features will fail to build.
> * **no-separate-feature-test** - The listed features are not tested in the "separate" feature test.
> * **options** - The listed features are mutually exclusive and can not be selected together. The
>   first feature in the list is added to every test combination. Use the `core` feature as first one
>   to add no feature to every test combination. [Note that, in general, features of this form are
>   not intended to be accepted for anything new in vcpkg's curated registry.](/vcpkg/contributing/maintainer-guide#do-not-use-features-to-implement-alternatives)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **`feature-fails`** - The listed features are known to fail and are excluded from the "combined" feature test.
* **`combination-fails`** - The listed combination of features fails to build. Individually, the features may build successfully.
* **`no-separate-feature-test`** - The listed features are not tested individually.
* **`options`** - The listed features are mutually exclusive and cannot be selected together.
  The first feature in the list is added to every test combination. If the `core` feature is the first on this list, no conflicting features are added to combined tests. **NOTE:** features of this form go [against the maintainer guide](../contributing/maintainer-guide.md#do-not-use-features-to-implement-alternatives) and no new features with this pattern will be accepted in to the [curated registry](https://github.com/Microsoft/vcpkg).
```
